[#anchor-58]
== Handlers

This chapter defines the programming model for handlers in Web Services
for Java EE. Handlers define a means for an application to access the
raw message of a request. This access is provided on both the client and
server. Handlers are not part of the WSDL specification and are
therefore not described in it. See section link:#anchor-39[6.3] for
declaration of handlers within deployment descriptors. The JAX-RPC
specification defines the Handler APIs in chapter 12. The JAX-WS
specification defines the Handler framework in chapter 9. This
specification defines Handler use within a Java EE environment.

=== Concepts

A Handler can be likened to a Servlet Filter in that it is business
logic that can examine and potentially modify a request before it is
processed by a Web Service component. It can also examine and
potentially modify the response after the component has processed the
request. Handlers can also run on the client before the request is sent
to the remote host and after the client receives a response.

JAX-RPC Handlers are specific to SOAP requests only and cannot be used
for other non-SOAP Web services. Handlers may be transport independent.
For instance, a Handler as defined by JAX-RPC may be usable for SOAP/JMS
in addition to SOAP/HTTP if a JMS protocol binding was available.

JAX-WS specification defines Logical Handlers and Protocol Handlers.
Logical Handlers are protocol agnostic and are unable to affect protocol
specific parts of a message. Protocol Handlers operate on message
context properties and protocol specific messages. Protocol handlers are
specific to a particular protocol and may access and change protocol
specific aspects of a message.

Handlers are service specific and therefore associated with a particular
Port component or port of a Service interface. This association is
defined in the deployment descriptors in section link:#anchor-66[7.1]
and link:#anchor-67[7.2] respectively. They are processed in an ordered
fashion called a HandlerChain, which is defined by the deployment
descriptors. JSR-181 defines the javax.jws.HandlerChain annotation,
which can be used with JAX-WS in the implementation code to declare
HandlerChains associated with a Port component or a Service.

There are several scenarios for which Handlers may be considered. These
include application specific SOAP header processing, logging, and
caching. A limited form of encryption is also possible. For application
specific SOAP header processing, it is important to note that the client
and server must agree on the header processing semantics without the aid
of a WSDL description that declares the semantic requirements.
Encryption is limited to a literal binding in which the SOAP message
part maps to a SOAPElement. In this case, a value within the SOAPElement
may be encrypted as long as the encryption of that value does not change
the structure of the SOAPElement.

Some Handler scenarios described within the JAX-RPC specification are
not supported by this specification. For example, auditing cannot be
fully supported because there is no means for a Handler to obtain the
Principal. The secure stock quote example cannot be supported as stated
because encrypting the body would prevent the container from determining
which Port component the request should be directed to and therefore
which Handler should decrypt the body.

A Handler always runs under the execution context of the application
logic. On the client side, the Stub/proxy controls Handler execution.
Client side Handlers run after the Stub/proxy has marshaled the message,
but before container services and the transport binding occurs. Server
side Handlers run after container services have run including method
level authorization, but before demarshalling and dispatching the
message to the endpoint. Handlers can access the java:comp/env context
for accessing resources and environment entries defined by the Port
component the Handler is associated with.

Handlers are constrained by the Java EE managed environment. Handlers
are not able to re-target a request to a different component. Handlers
cannot change the WSDL operation nor can Handlers change the message
part types and number of parts. On the server, Handlers can only
communicate with the business logic of the component using the
MessageContext. On the client, Handlers have no means of communicating
with the business logic of the client. There is no standard means for a
Handler to access the security identity associated with a request,
therefore Handlers cannot portably perform processing based on security
identity.

The life cycle of a Handler is controlled by the container.

Handlers are associated with the Port component on the server and
therefore run in both the web and EJB containers.

Java EE applications that define one or more port components or service
references include WSDL descriptions for each of them as well as
application logic and (optionally) message handlers associated with
them. In order for such applications to behave predictably, all three
elements (description, handlers and application logic) must be well
aligned. Developers should program handlers carefully in order not to
create invalid SOAP envelope format that contradicts WS-I BP 1.0
requirements or violates the message schema declared in the WSDL. In
particular, containers cannot provide any guarantees beyond those
specified as part of the interoperability requirements on the behavior
of an application that violates the assumptions embedded in a WSDL
document either in its business logic or in message handlers.

=== Specification

This section defines the requirements for JAX-RPC or JAX-WS Handlers
running in Web Services for Java EE. Chapter 12 of the JAX-RPC
specification and Chapter 9 of the JAX-WS specification defines the
programming model requirements. Differences between this specification
and the JAX-RPC or JAX-WS specification are noted in boxed paragraphs.

==== Scenarios

Handlers must be able to support the following scenarios:

Scenario 1: Handlers must be able to transform the SOAP header. One
example is the addition of a SOAP header for application specific
information, like customerId, by the handler.

Scenario 2: Handlers must be able to transform just parts of the body.
This might include changing part values within the SOAP body. Encryption
of some parameter values is an example of this scenario.

Scenario 3: Handlers must be able to just read a message where no
additions, transformations, or modification to the message is made.
Common scenarios are logging, metering, and accounting.

==== Programming Model

A Web Services for Java EE provider is required to provide all
interfaces and classes of the javax.xml.rpc.handler package and
javax.xml.ws.handler package. When JAX-RPC is being used, the
HandlerInfo setHandlerConfig() and getHandlerConfig() methods do not
affect the container’s Handler request processing.

A JAX-RPC Web Services for Java EE provider is not required to provide
an implementation of HandlerRegistry. This functionality is specific to
the container.

A JAX-WS Web Services for Java EE provider is required to provide an
implementation of HandlerResolver that returns the Handler Chain with
Handlers specified in the deployment descriptor or the
javax.jws.HandlerChain annotation. The ordering of the Handlers in the
HandlerChain must follow the requirements specified in JAX-WS
specification section 9.2.1.2. In addition to this, the ordering of any
given type of Handler (logical or protocol) in the deployment descriptor
must be maintained

A Web Services for Java EE provider is required to provide an
implementation of MessageContext.

A Web Services for Java EE provider is required to provide all the
interfaces of the javax.xml.rpc.handler.soap and
javax.xml.ws.handler.soap package. The provider must also provide an
implementation of the SOAPMessageContext interface.

The programming model of a Port component can be single-threaded or
multi-threaded as defined in sections link:#anchor-45[5.3.2.3] and
link:#anchor-44[5.3.2.4]. The concurrency of a JAX-RPC or JAX-WS Handler
must match the concurrency of the business logic it is associated with.
Client handlers may need to support multi-threaded execution depending
on the business logic which is accessing the Port.

Handlers must be loaded using the same class loader the application code
was loaded with. The class loading rules follow the rules defined for
the container the Handler is running in.

In a product that also supports JSR-299, an implementation must support
use of 299-style managed beans as JAX-WS handler classes in an
application. JSR-299 specifies the requirements for these
container-managed bean instances w.r.t instantiation, injection and
other services. JSR-299 defines @Dependent pseudo-scope, handler classes
must be specified in that scope. It is an error if the handler class has
a scope other than the required one.

In a product that also supports Managed Beans, an implementation must
support use of managed beans as JAX-WS handler classes in an
application. Managed Beans specification specifies the requirements for
these container-managed bean instances w.r.t instantiation, injection
and other services.

===== Handler Life Cycle with JAX-RPC

The life cycle of a Handler is controlled by the container and is
illustrated in link:#anchor-68[Figure 7].

image:7.png[image,width=301,height=188]

* [#anchor-68]##Figure 7 Handler life cycle

The init and destroy methods of the Handler interface allows the
container to notify a Handler instance of impending changes in its
state. The Handler may use the notification to prepare its internal
state for the transition. The container is required to call the init and
destroy methods as described below.

The container must call the init method before it can start dispatching
requests to the handleRequest(), handleResponse(), and handleFault()
methods of the Handler. The Handler may use the container notification
to ready its internal state for receiving requests.

The container must notify the Handler of its intent to remove the
instance from the container’s working set by calling the destroy method.
A container must not call the destroy method while a request is being
processed by the Handler instance. The container must not dispatch
additional requests to the Handler interface methods after the destroy
method is called.

As defined by JAX-RPC, a RuntimeException (other than
SOAPFaultException) thrown from any method of the Handler results in the
destroy method being invoked and transition to the “Does Not Exist”
state.

Pooling of Handler instances is allowed, but is not required. If Handler
instances are pooled, they must be pooled by Port component. This is
because Handlers may retain non-client specific state across method
calls that are specific to the Port component. For instance, a Handler
may initialize internal data members with Port component specific
environment values. These values may not be consistent when a single
Handler type is associated with multiple Port components. Any pooled
instance of a Port component’s Handler in a Method Ready state may be
used to service the handleRequest(), handleResponse(), and handleFault()
methods. It is not required that the same Handler instance service both
the handleRequest() and handleResponse() or handleFault() method
invocations of any given request.

===== Handler Life Cycle with JAX-WS

With JAX-WS the Handler lifecycle is similar to JAX-RPC illustration
shown in the previous section with the following differences:

* The init() method is now replaced by a method carrying a
javax.annotation.PostConstruct annotation (defined by JSR-250
specification, Section 2.4). This method is only called after all
injections requested by the Handler are completed.
* The destroy() method is replaced by a method carrying a
javax.annotation.PreDestroy annotation (defined by JSR-250
specification, Section 2.5).
* Methods handleRequest() and handleResponse() are replaced by
handleMessage().

The lifecycle methods annotated with javax.annotation.PostConstruct and
javax.annotation.PreDestroy in the Handler implementation allows the
container to notify a Handler instance of impending changes in its
state. Detailed requirements for Handler lifecycle are described in
section 9.3.1 JAX-WS specification. The Handler may use the notification
to prepare its internal state for the transition. The container is
required to call lifecycle methods annotated with
javax.annotation.PostConstruct and javax.annotation.PreDestroy as
described below.

The container must carry out any injections (if any) requested by the
handler, typically via the @Resource annotation (see section 2.2 of
JSR-250 Common Annotations for Java Platform specification). After all
the injections have been carried out, the container must invoke the
method carrying a javax.annotation.PostConstruct annotation. This method
must have a void return type and take zero arguments. The handler
instance is then ready for use and other handler methods may be invoked.

The container must call the lifecycle method annotated with
javax.annotation.PreDestroy annotation on any Handler instances which it
instantiated, before releasing a handler instance from its working set.
A container must not call this method while a request is being processed
by the Handler instance. The container must not dispatch additional
requests to the Handler after the this method is called.

The requirements for processing any RuntimeException or
ProtocolException thrown from handle<action>() method of the handler are
defined in sections 9.3.2.1 and 9.3.2.2 of the JAX-WS specification.

Pooling of Handler instances is allowed, but is not required. If Handler
instances are pooled, they must be pooled by Port component. This is
because Handlers may retain non-client specific state across method
calls that are specific to the Port component. For instance, a Handler
may initialize internal data members with Port component specific
environment values. These values may not be consistent when a single
Handler type is associated with multiple Port components. Any pooled
instance of a Port component’s Handler in a Method Ready state may be
used to service handle<action>() methods in a JAX-WS based container. It
is not required that the same Handler instance service handleMessage()
or handleFault() method invocation of any given request in the JAX-WS
based container.

===== _javax.jws.HandlerChain_ annotation

The javax.jws.HandlerChain annotation from JSR-181 (imported by JAX-WS)
may be declared on Web Service endpoints (those declared with the
javax.jws.WebService or javax.xml.ws.WebServiceProvider annotation) or
on Web Service references (those declared with the
javax.xml.ws.WebServiceRef annotation). This annotation is used to
specify the handler chain to be applied on the declared port component
or Service reference. Details on the javax.jws.HandlerChain annotation
can be found in section 4.6 of JSR-181 specification. If this annotation
is used, the handler chain file for this must be packaged with the
application unit according to the packaging rules in Section 6.3.

The deployment descriptors on port component or Service reference
override the javax.jws.HandlerChain annotation specified in the
implementation.

The <handler-chains> element in the deployment descriptor is used for
specifying the handlers on a port component or Service reference. This
deployment descriptor allows for specifying multiple handler chains such
that all handlers in a handler chain could be specific to a Service
name, a Port name or a list of protocol bindings. Patterns on Service
names and Port names are also allowed, where in the handlers in a
handler chain could be specific to a Service name pattern or Port name
pattern. Refer to Chapter 7 for details on the deployment schema for
handlers.

JAX-WS based container provider is required to support this annotation.
They are also required to provide an implementation of HandlerResolver
that returns a handler chain with handlers specified in the deployment
descriptor or the javax.jws.HandlerChain annotation. The ordering of the
handlers in the handler chain must follow the requirements specified in
JAX-WS specification section 9.2.1.2. In addition to this, the ordering
of any given type of Handler (logical or protocol) in the deployment
descriptor must be maintained

===== Security

Handlers associated with a Port component run after authorization has
occurred and before the business logic method of the Service
Implementation bean is dispatched to. For JAX-RPC or JAX-WS Service
endpoints, Handlers run after the container has performed the security
constraint checks associated with the servlet element that defines the
Port component. For EJB based service implementations, Handlers run
after method level authorization has occurred.

A Handler must not change the message in any way that would cause the
previously executed authorization check to execute differently.

A handler may perform programmatic authorization checks if the
authorization is based solely on the MessageContext and the component’s
environment values. A Handler cannot perform role based programmatic
authorization checks nor can a Handler access the Principal associated
with the request.

The Java 2 security permissions of a Handler follow the permissions
defined by the container it runs in. The application client, web, and
EJB containers may have different permissions associated with them. If
the provider allows defining permissions on a per application basis,
permissions granted to a Handler are defined by the permissions granted
to the application code it is packaged with. See section EE.6.2.3 of the
Java EE specification for more details.

[#anchor-69]
===== Transactions

Handlers run under the transaction context of the component they are
associated with.

Handlers must not demarcate transactions using the
javax.transaction.UserTransaction interface.

==== Developer Responsibilities

A developer is not required to implement a Handler. Handlers are another
means of writing business logic associated with processing a Web
services request. A developer may implement zero or more Handlers that
are associated with a Port component and/or a Service reference. If a
developer implements a Handler, they must follow the requirements
outlined in this section.

A Handler is implemented as a stateless instance. A Handler does not
maintain any message processing (client specific) related state in its
instance variables across multiple invocations of the handle method.

A Handler class using JAX-RPC must implement the
java.xml.rpc.handler.Handler interface. With JAX-WS a Handler class must
implement the javax.xml.ws.handler.Handler interface or one of its
subinterfaces.

With JAX-RPC, a Handler.handle<action>() method may access the
component’s environment entries by using JNDI lookup of the
“java:comp/env” context and accessing the env-entry-names defined in the
deployment descriptor by performing a JNDI lookup. See chapter 15 of the
Enterprise JavaBeans specification - _Enterprise JavaBeans Core
Contracts and Requirements_ for details. The container may throw a
java.lang.IllegalStateException if the environment is accessed from any
other Handler method and the environment is not available. In addition,
the Handler may use HandlerInfo.getHandlerConfig() method to access the
Handler’s init-params declared in the deployment descriptor.

With JAX-WS, the handler allows for resources to be injected, typically
by using the @Resource annotation. So a Handler.handle<action>() method
may access the component’s context and environment entries by using any
resources that were injected. It can also use JNDI lookup of the
“java:comp/env” context and accessing the env-entry-names defined in the
deployment descriptor by performing a JNDI lookup. See chapter 15 of the
Enterprise JavaBeans specification - _Enterprise JavaBeans Core
Contracts and Requirements_ for details. The container may throw a
java.lang.IllegalStateException if the environment is accessed from any
other Handler method and the environment is not available. The element
init-params in the deployment descriptors is no longer used for JAX-WS
based container. If needed, the developer should use the environment
entry elements (<env-entry>) declared in the application component's
deployment descriptor for this purpose. These can be injected into the
handler using the @Resource annotation or looked up using JNDI.

When JAX-RPC is used, the Handler.init() method must retain the
information defined by HandlerInfo.getHeaders(). With JAX-WS, Handler
implementation that implements the javax.xml.ws.handler.soap.SOAPHandler
interface must contain all the headers information needed by it.
Additionally, in this case the soap-header element declared in the
deployment descriptor is not required since that information is embedded
in the implementation of the Handler class.

With JAX-RPC, a Handler implementation must implement the getHeaders()
method to return the results of the HandlerInfo.getHeaders() method. The
headers that a Handler declares it will process (i.e. those returned by
the Handler.getHeaders() method must be defined in the WSDL definition
of the service.

With JAX-WS, only a Handler implementation that implements the
javax.xml.ws.handler.soap.SOAPHandler interface must implement the
getHeaders() method. The headers that a Handler declares it will process
(i.e. those returned by the Handler.getHeaders() method) must be defined
in the WSDL definition of the service.

A Handler implementation should test the type of the MessageContext
passed to the Handler in the handle<action>() methods. Although this
specification only requires support for SOAP messages and the container
will pass a SOAPMessageContext in this case, some providers may provide
extensions that allow other message types and MessageContext types to be
used. A Handler implementation should be ready to accept and ignore
message types which it does not understand.

A Handler implementation must use the MessageContext to pass information
to other Handler implementations in the same Handler chain and, in the
case of the JAX-RPC or JAX-WS service endpoint, to the Service
Implementation Bean. A container is not required to use the same thread
for invoking each Handler or for invoking the Service Implementation
Bean.

With JAX-RPC, a Handler may access the env-entrys of the component it is
associated with by using JNDI to lookup an appropriate subcontext of
java:comp/env. Access to the java:comp/env contexts must be supported
from the init() and handle<action>() methods. Access may not be
supported within the destroy() method.

With JAX-WS, a Handler may access the env-entrys of the component it is
associated with by using JNDI to lookup an appropriate subcontext of
java:comp/env. It may also access these if they are injected using the
@Resource annotation. Access to the java:comp/env contexts must be
supported from the method annotated with javax.annotation.PostConstruct
and handle<action>() methods. Access may not be supported within the
method annotated with javax.annotation.PreDestroy annotation.

A Handler may access transactional resources defined by a component’s
resource-refs. Resources are accessed under a transaction context
according to section link:#anchor-69[6.2.2.5].

A Handler may access the complete SOAP message and can process both SOAP
header blocks and body if the handle<action>() method is passed a
SOAPMessageContext.

A SOAPMessageContext Handler may add or remove headers from the SOAP
message. A SOAPMessageContext Handler may modify the header of a SOAP
message if it is not mapped to a parameter or if the modification does
not change value type of the parameter if it is mapped to a parameter. A
Handler may modify part values of a message if the modification does not
change the value type.

Handlers that define application specific headers should declare the
header schema in the WSDL document for the component they are associated
with, but are not required to do so.

==== Container Provider Responsibilities

In a JAX-RPC based container, a Handler chain is processed according to
the JAX-RPC specification section 12.2.2. The process order defaults to
the order the handlers are defined in the deployment descriptor and
follow the JAX-RPC specification section 12.1.4 processing order.

In a JAX-WS based container, a Handler chain is processed according to
the JAX-WS specification section 9.2.1.2. In addition to this, the
ordering of any given type of Handler (logical or protocol) in the
deployment descriptor or in the handler configuration file specified in
the javax.jws.HandlerChain annotation, must be maintained.

The container must ensure that for EJB based Web Service endpoints with
both Handlers and EJB Interceptors present, the Handlers must be invoked
before any EJB business method interceptor methods.

A JAX-RPC based container is required to provide an instance of a
java.util.Map object in the HandlerInfo instance. The
HandlerInfo.getHeaders() method must return the set of soap-headers
defined in the deployment descriptor. The Map object must provide access
to each of the Handler’s init-param name/value pairs declared in the
deployment descriptor as java.lang.String values. The container must
provide a unique HandlerInfo instance and Map config instance for each
Handler instance. A unique Handler instance must be provided for each
Port component declared in the deployment descriptor.

A JAX-WS based container must carry out any injections (if any)
requested by the handler, typically via the @Resource annotation (see
section 2.2 of JSR-250 Common Annotations for Java Platform
specification). A JAX-WS handler should use the
javax.xml.ws.WebServiceContext, which is an injectable resource, to
access message context and security information relative to the request
being served. A unique Handler instance must be provided for each Port
component declared in the deployment descriptor or annotated by
javax.jws.WebService or javax.xml.ws.WebServiceProvider annotations.

The container provider must ensure that for a JAX-WS based EJB endpoint
executing in the EJB container, with both Handlers and EJB Interceptors
present, the java.util.Map<String,Object> instance returned by invoking
WebServiceContext.getMessageContext() method in the JAX-WS Handler, is
the same Map instance that is obtained by invoking
InvocationContext.getContextData() in the EJB Interceptor. This common
Map instance would allow for sharing of data (if required) between the
Handlers and Interceptors.

A JAX-RPC based container must call the init() method within the context
of a Port component’s environment. The container must ensure the Port
component’s env-entrys are setup for the init method to access.

A JAX-WS based container must call the lifecycle method annotated with
javax.annotation.PostConstruct within the context of a Port component’s
environment. The container must ensure the Port component’s env-entrys
are setup for this lifecycle method to access.

The container must provide a MessageContext type unique to the request
type. For example, the container must provide a SOAPMessageContext to
the handle<action>() methods of a JAX-RPC Handler or a JAX-WS
SOAPHandler in a handler chain when processing a SOAP request. The
SOAPMessageContext must contain the complete SOAP message.

The container must share the same MessageContext instance across all
Handler instances and the target endpoint that are invoked during a
single request and response or fault processing on a specific node.

The container must setup the Port component’s execution environment
before invoking the handle<action>() methods of a handler chain.
Handlers run under the same execution environment as the Port
component’s business methods. This is required so that handlers have
access to the Port component's java:comp/env context.

[#anchor-39]
=== Packaging

A developer is required to package, either by containment or reference,
the Handler class and its dependent classes in the module with the
deployment descriptor information that references the Handler classes. A
developer is responsible for defining the handler chain information in
the deployment descriptor.

The handler chain file in the javax.jws.HandlerChain annotation is
required to be packaged in the module. It must follow the requirements
for location as specified in section 4.6.1 of JSR-181 specification (Web
Services Metadata for the Java Platform). Additionally, the handler
chain file can also be packaged and specified in the annotation such
that, it is accessible as a resource from the ClassPath. At runtime,
container providers must first try to access the handler chain file as
per the locations specified in JSR-181 specification. Failing that, they
must try to access it as a resource from the ClassPath. If more than one
resources are returned from the ClassPath, then the first one is used.

=== Object Interaction Diagrams

This section contains object interaction diagrams for handler
processing. In general, the interaction diagrams are meant to be
illustrative.

==== Client Web service method access

image:8.png[image,width=331,height=336]

* Figure 8 Client method invoke handler OID

==== EJB Web service method invocation

image:9.png[image,width=517,height=345]

* Figure 9 EJB Web service method invocation handler processing part 1

image:10.png[image,width=504,height=174]

* Figure 10 EJB Web service method invocation handler processing part 2
